[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well, it's
healthy to be a skeptic,
but it's even healthier
to be a believer
after you've checked into facts.
You'll find that out on
our next "Beyond Belief."
>>NARRATOR: He is
one of America's most
prominent skeptics and
perhaps the world's
only full-time professional,
science-based paranormal
investigator.
Joe Nickell is a
senior research fellow
for the community for
skeptical inquiry,
writes regularly for its
journal, the "Skeptical
Inquirer," and is an associate
dean of the Center for Inquiry
Institute.
The author or editor
of more than 30 books,
Joe doesn't see
himself as a debunker.
But so far, he has yet
to uncover any truth
miracles, ghosts, or monsters.
He reveals what he has
found today "Beyond Belief."
>>NOORY: And one
of Joe Nickell's
books, of course, that he
wrote with Robert Bartholomew,
"American Hauntings,"
and we're going
to get into that
in a big way today.
Joe, welcome to the program.
>>JOE NICKELL:
Pleasure being here.
>>NOORY: How did
you, as a skeptic,
get involved in investigating
paranormal issues?
>>NICKELL: I grew up as a boy,
like every other boy or girl,
interested in ghosts
and so forth, was
fascinated by Houdini.
My father was an
amateur magician,
so we had magic stuff all--
>>NOORY: You love that stuff.
>>NICKELL: --from my
earliest memories.
I later would become
a resident magician
at the Houdini Hall of
Fame and went on from there
to work as a detective for a
world famous detective agency
and somewhat later in life
got a master's and doctorate
in English literature
and folklore.
So it's an odd mix.
>>NOORY: You mixed
them all, though.
>>NICKELL: But it works for me.
I'm not a scientist,
but I've always
been sort of a forensic buff.
And I'm co-author of the
book "Crime Science."
So if I need a real scientist,
of course, I go get one.
But it's a great mix, and
it's all very interesting.
And I found out long
ago that it might
be fun to believe
something, or it
might be fun to make
fun of something silly.
What was really interesting
was to actually try
to solve a mystery.
There's nothing that
even comes close to that
as a satisfying
personal accomplishment.
>>NOORY: That excites
you a lot, doesn't it?
>>NICKELL: It does.
And I found out-- I've done
literary detective work,
historical,
forensic, paranormal,
and I don't care-- I don't
much care what the topic is.
If it's interesting,
mysterious, and if I
think I might have a
chance to solve it, I'm in.
>>NOORY: Joe, a lot of people
confuse the word skeptic.
Because they think a
skeptic is a nonbeliever.
My definition of a
skeptic is someone
who wants to find the
facts before he decides
whether to believe or not.
Is that true?
>>NICKELL: That's it.
You really have to-- I mean, you
could be skeptical of anything.
There are people with misplaced
skepticism about, let's say,
the Holocaust or global warming.
What we need is we
need to have skepticism
to those things to
which skepticism is due,
meaning those things that
appear on the face of it
to be far fetched or appear
to contradict science.
They may be legit, but
they're sort of warning signs
or they kind of need
to be checked out.
And so if we're skeptical
of those things,
that's just the natural
correct attitude of mind.
And it doesn't prejudge.
It doesn't say that
something isn't
true to question, oh, really?
I remember Coleridge, the
famous literary figure,
and he had this term he used
called "the willing suspension
of disbelief."
In other words, you
don't sit in the theater
and nudge your friend and say,
those aren't real bullets.
He didn't really kill her.
Because that's just annoying.
The same in the paranormal.
We need to put aside the sort
of belief-disbelief question
for the time being, go to the
haunted house or whatever,
and ask ourselves, what
really happened here?
How do we know that?
Are we sure?
Is that a fact,
or is that a piece
of false information
somebody made up?
And then when we
can get the facts,
we might have a chance to
find out what really happened.
>>NOORY: Joe, if you
can't get the facts,
because it's difficult--
let's talk about God for now.
It's very difficult to
prove the existence of God
with evidence and fact.
>>NICKELL: It is hard.
>>NOORY: So what do
you do about that?
Do you stay a skeptic
and say there is no God?
>>NICKELL: I tend
to take the position
that if there is
not evidence for it,
then I just remain
skeptical of it.
In other words, I wouldn't
try to convince you
that there are no leprechauns.
I mean, how would we do that?
I have a standing offer if
somebody wants to finance--
>>NOORY: Let's go to Ireland.
Let's do it.
>>NICKELL: Yeah, if they want
to finance my expedition,
George and I will go.
>>NOORY: We'll go.
>>NICKELL: We'll go to Ireland,
and we'll beat the bushes,
and we'll say, no,
no leprechauns.
And somebody will
say, ah, but don't you
know that we creatures are
mostly around Blarney Castle,
don't you know?
OK, fine.
We'll go back.
We may have to have
a few more drinks.
We'll have a good time,
no, no leprechauns.
Ah, but don't you know
that we creatures have
the power of invisibility,
don't you know?
Well, at some point--
>>NOORY: [INAUDIBLE] I'm
standing right next to you,
man, right?
>>NICKELL: [LAUGHING]
So what we have
to do-- I can't prove
there are no leprechauns.
I just assume that until
somebody brings me--
I hate to say this,
George-- a dead leprechaun--
>>NOORY: Oh!
>>NICKELL: Oh, I
shouldn't have said that.
I know I'll be hated now.
All the school children--
>>NOORY: I thought
they lived forever.
>>NICKELL: Well, maybe they do.
But you see my point.
Unless we have some really
good evidence that science
could really get into--
>>NOORY: And back it up.
>>NICKELL: --then we
just don't believe.
It's not a question of
proving there isn't a God
or proving there aren't angels.
I just don't bother doing that.
I say, well, we can
explain the world and most
of the phenomena in the
world without recourse
to any supernatural.
So I just have no belief
in the supernatural.
But it would be folly
for me to attempt
to disprove all those things.
>>NOORY: Well, let's
talk a little bit
about some of your
investigations
into the paranormal world
that you highlight in the book
"American Hauntings," of course.
What we do is we look at several
cases in the book, including,
of course, one of my
favorites, "The Exorcist."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>My bed was shaking.
>>Do you think I should
take her to a psychiatrist?
>>The problem with your
daughter is not her bed.
It's her brain.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>[GROUP SINGING]
>>I think we've got a guest.
>>You're gonna die up there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Mother!
Mother!
[SCREAMING]
I don't want it!
>>Honey, it's to help you!
>>NOORY: You're gonna
feel a little stick here.
>>NICKELL: Why this girl?
It doesn't make sense.
>>Please, Mother!
Make it stop!
It's burning!
Make it-- [GROWLING]
>>You tell me you
know for a fact
that an exorcism
wouldn't do any good!
You tell me that!
>>The sow is mine!
[GROWLING]
>>You know what she did.
[SCREAMING]
>>Help her!
Help her!
>>The power of
Christ compels you!
>>NOORY: OK, that was Linda
Blair in "The Exorcist."
The real story was a little boy
from Baltimore, Maryland, ended
up in St. Louis.
>>NICKELL: Boy named R.
>>NOORY: Where those
priests that I,
for the rest of my career,
tried to interview.
One refused.
The other has died.
Now the other one has died.
We were never able
to get to him.
But something horrendous
happened in that hospital
where that little
boy was exorcised.
>>NICKELL: Actually, one of
the priests kept a diary.
And that diary has been
available and published.
And I went through that
with some interest,
trying to look at it from my
magician's background, what
exactly was happening.
And that case really
started out as a kind
of poltergeist
case, some mischief,
some odd things thrown
about or whatever.
And it gradually became more
of something sinister and--
>>NOORY: Evil.
>>NICKELL: Yeah, evil,
and took on-- it evolved,
in other words, which
makes me suspicious
of it being a
genuine phenomenon.
The boy was at the
center for everything,
as is the case
with poltergeists.
That is, nothing happened
if he wasn't around.
And he would produce
these markings.
Words would be
scratched on his body.
And, of course, people thought,
he couldn't be doing this.
But in fact, he was actually
caught once doing it.
And then you see
the rationalizations
of the believers, saying,
yeah, but he was just imitating
what the real demons did.
No, see, when anybody's
caught faking something,
I'm pretty well ready to just
close the case right there.
>>NOORY: That's it
for you right there.
>>NICKELL: So that
case, if you go back
and you cut through all
the exaggerations, all
the elaborations and stuff, and
look at what really happened,
most of it was stuff
that a boy could
and apparently did do,
nothing supernatural.
People were trying to impose
on that layers of claims
that just don't hold water.
I've written
extensively about it,
and I just think
that people are going
to have to find a
better case if they
want to prove the supernatural.
>>NOORY: Was the boy
doing it for attention?
>>NICKELL: This is the
most difficult part
of some of these cases is
trying to get at motive.
It's easy enough to say, OK,
we caught So-and-So red-handed.
Why was he doing it?
>>NOORY: What's he
gaining from it?
>>NICKELL: The kid
often doesn't even
know himself why he's doing it.
It could be a combination
of the difficulties
of going through puberty,
family situations.
>>NOORY: Mentally
disturbed, pressure.
>>NICKELL: Exactly.
Subconscious motivations,
desire for attention
without really being aware
of what you're doing.
Just boredom can produce
a great deal of mischief
from kids-- just boredom.
They find that if--
>>NOORY: Even during that era?
>>NICKELL: Yeah.
Yeah.
And so I think that that case--
and it spills over to movies
like the "Poltergeist,"
"Amityville Horror,"
"The Conjuring"--
>>NOORY: Yeah.
We'll get into all off that.
>>NICKELL: Not so
much Amityville,
because Amityville really
wasn't kids acting up primarily.
Amityville was a hoax.
And it was not the
"Amityville Horror."
>>NOORY: Well, let's look at
a clip on that, "Amityville
Horror," from the movie.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THUD]
>>God's peace in this house.
>>Get out!
Get out!
[PHONE RINGING]
>>Hello?
>>NOORY: Hello.
Kathy?
Father Delaney.
There's something very impor--
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THUNDER CLAPPING]
>>Mommy, I want to go home!
[SCREAMING]
>>No!
>>What do you want from us?
[THUNDER CLAPPING]
>>Why is this all going wrong?
[SNIFFLES] We have
to do something.
[THUNDER CLAPPING]
>>[GASPS] I'm coming apart!
Oh, mother of God!
I'm coming apart!
[THUNDER CLAPPING]
[GLASS BREAKING]
>>28 days after the Lutz family
moved into their dream house--
[GLASS BREAKING]
--they were running
for their lives.
What happened to them is
an experience in terror
you will never forget.
And you will believe in
the Amityville Horror.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>NOORY: OK, what
do you say, Joe,
that this episode was a hoax?
The murders were real.
They happened in that house.
>>NICKELL: Right.
Ronald DeFeo absolutely
murdered his parents
and his siblings in that house.
And that horror was real.
But when George and
Kathy Lutz came in later,
apparently looking for
book and movie deals,
they didn't seem to really have
plans to really stay there very
long and didn't have the money.
When I first heard the case
of the Amityville Horror,
and I had by that point a lot
of experience with such cases,
it sounded a little bit
like a traditional haunting,
a little bit like a poltergeist,
a little bit like a demon.
It was such a hodgepodge it
was like if you and I decided
to make up a case.
We put a little bit
of each ingredient
in because it would make
it more interesting.
I had never seen a case of
that type, that admixture.
I'd never seen anything like it.
Pretty quickly you could show
that some of the things that
were claimed didn't happen.
For example, the devil's
tracks in the snow
couldn't have
happened, because there
was no snow on the
ground on those dates.
And I knew Barbara Cromarty,
who lived in the house later,
and she could take
you around the house
and show you that some of
the windows and doors that
were supposedly ripped off their
hinges by demonic forces, that
never happened.
The old hardware
was still there.
>>NOORY: That's disappointing.
>>NICKELL: The old
varnish in place.
No locksmiths had ever
been called to the house.
The police said they
never were called.
Surprise to people
who watch the movie
and read the book, because
they're convinced the police
came and the priest
came and stuff.
That was all made up.
>>NOORY: So you think
the whole thing other
than the murders was all
made up to make money.
>>NICKELL: Pretty much.
Pretty much.
Because Ronald DeFeo's attorney
William Weber testified.
He came forward
and actually said
that those horror
incidents were made up
over several bottles of
wine in his law office, wine
that George Lutz was drinking.
And they were making this up.
Now, why was Weber doing this?
Well, he thought if there
was any kind of demonic story
and people believed that demons
were kind of possessing people,
maybe he could get a new trial
for his client, the murderer.
>>NOORY: What lawyer would
want to get a client off
when he knew they were--
well, that's another story.
>>NICKELL: It's just bizarre.
But there is Weber
having confessed.
It's well known.
And the Cromartys
sued because they
couldn't have peace of mind.
People would show up in their
lawn and knock on their door
at all hours.
And it just became a
hodgepodge of stuff, much of it
sealed records, but we basically
that most of this was made up.
And what wasn't was just an
exaggeration of some things.
>>NOORY: Two cases that
you don't believe are real.
Let's look at, of course, a
third episode from, of course,
Hollywood, the "Poltergeist."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>The house looks just like the
one next to it and the one next
to that and the
one next to that.
A young couple live in it--
>>Give Ken a kiss.
[MAKING STRANGE NOISES]
[LAUGHING]
>>You are so obnoxious!
>>--with their three children--
>>Honey, chew eat
bite ten times.
[CHATTER]
>>--and something more.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Hello?
They're here.
>>Sweetie, remember last night?
Do you remember when you woke
up and you said, they're here?
>>Uh-huh.
>>Well, who did you mean?
Who's here?
>>The TV people.
>>Something's funny going on
here next door, something, uh--
>>We were wondering if
maybe you had experienced
any disturbances lately.
>>What kind of disturbances?
[LOUD RUMBLING]
[SCREAMING]
[GLASS BREAKING]
>>I don't know what
hovers over this house.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Have you ever sensed
anything like it?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>That thing is in
there with my baby!
[SCRATCHING]
>>There are hundreds.
>>Now Steven Spielberg crosses
a frightening new threshold
into a world within our own.
>>[INAUDIBLE]
>>Its form is revealed.
>>What is it?
>>Its focus is clear.
>>No!
Don't touch my baby!
>>And the games are over.
>>[SCREAMING]
>>Mom!
[CLATTERING]
[SCREAMING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Steven!
[SCREAMING]
>>(SCREAMING) What's happening?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Poltergeist.
It knows what scares you.
>>NOORY: So the
poltergeist episode
that we saw in the movie,
is not an isolated case
that you investigated?
Or is it something that's
just general and broad?
>>NICKELL: There are so
many poltergeist cases.
Really quite a
specialized study could
be made of just that particular
phenomenon, because there
are so many cases.
>>NOORY: They're everywhere.
>>NICKELL: They're everywhere--
the Columbus poltergeist
with Tina Resch. there's
the "Conjuring 2"
movie now that's taken an
old case and rehashed it.
But what you typically
have with a poltergeist--
and remember the boy R behind
"The Exorcist" started really
as a poltergeist case-- you
have a kid, or sometimes
a couple of
children, in a house,
and things begin to happen.
Objects are thrown
about, people are amazed.
And what's happening is
that parents are usually
quite credulous.
Parents who say, OK,
Jimmy, that's enough,
I'll slap you around if you
do that again, those cases we
never hear about.
But when skeptics try to come
in and use their knowledge
to explain what's
happening, the parents
are protective of the children.
And skeptics rarely ever get on
the premises-- very few cases.
>>NOORY: But that's not
to say that these cases,
these poltergeists cases,
aren't real, right?
>>NICKELL: Well,
there's real mischief,
but there's no scientific
evidence for anything
called a poltergeist.
What happens is that time and
again, the kids are caught.
They're first suspected.
Eventually-- Tina
Resch was caught.
The little girl in "The
Conjuring 2" movie was caught.
And again, in come the
defenders saying, well,
they may have gotten
caught up in the brouhaha,
but there's some
real material there.
They didn't fake everything.
Well, it looks like
perhaps that they did.
And people don't
understand what's going on.
They'll say, for example, having
no knowledge of magic tricks,
they'll say, well, the
person who is watching
was looking into
that other room,
and they see this object
jump off a shelf and break,
and little Jimmy was
nowhere in the room.
He was behind him.
What they don't realize is that
little Jimmy may have picked up
an object earlier, hidden it,
and tossed it over the guy's
shoulder, and then the
guy sees it in mid air,
and he's convinced because
it usually was on the shelf,
he's convinced he
saw it leap up.
People are just notoriously
bad witnesses for magic tricks,
whether they're done by
professional stage magician
or the amateur antics of a kid.
If you go through, as I've
done with many of these cases,
using just a
magician's knowledge
of how this could be done--
>>NOORY: Knowledge
of trickery-- right.
>>NICKELL: --I'm not impressed.
They've never found a
single poltergeist case
where I didn't think
that that could easily
be done as trickery or the
person who was insisting
on something was probably just
as mistaken as eyewitnesses
so often are in criminal
cases and in being witnesses
of Bigfoot.
>>NOORY: Now one of the great
haunting cases, of course
depicted again by Hollywood,
in "The Conjuring."
>>Give us a sign that you
want to communicate with us.
Nothing.
[CLOCK CHIMING]
[CHILDREN LAUGHING]
>>What are you guys?
>>Well, we've been
called ghost hunters,
paranormal researchers.
>>But we prefer
to be known simply
as Ed and Lorraine Warren.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>There is someone here that
would like to talk to you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>There's something horrible
happening in my house.
[CLOCK TICKING LOUDLY]
[CRASHING]
[GASPING]
[GLASS BREAKING]
[SCREAMING]
>>Kat?
>>It's November 1, 1971.
I am sitting here with Carolyn
Perron, who, with her family,
has been experiencing
supernatural occurrences.
>>You picking up
anything in here, hon?
>>Something awful
happened here, Ed.
>>What is it?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Whatever Lorraine sees, feels,
touches takes a toll on her,
a little piece each time.
[THUD]
>>You have a lot
of spirits in here.
But there's one that
I'm most worried about,
because it is so hateful.
>>(WHISPERING) Look
what she made me do.
[SOBBING]
[SCREAMING]
>>We have to get out of here.
>>That's not gonna help.
>>This thing has latched
itself to your family.
[SCREAMING]
[GLASS BREAKING]
>>Father, we never
seen nothing like this.
[GLASS BREAKING]
[SCREAMING]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
>>I'm coming with you.
>>No way.
I can't lose you.
[WOOD CRACKING]
[SCREAMING]
>>Lorraine?
>>There's a lady in
a dirty nightgown
that I see in my dreams.
She's standing in
front of my mom's bed.
[SCREAMING]
[ROARING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Do you want to see him?
>>Yeah.
>>When the music
stops, you'll see him
in the mirror
standing behind you.
[MUSIC BOX MUSIC PLAYING]
>>(WHISPERING) Look
what she made me do.
[SCREAMING]
>>NOORY: OK, now what about
this case, Joe, "The Conjuring?"
>>NICKELL: I've had
the good fortune
of being at the
very house that was
at the center of
this decade of claims
by the Perron family
of demonic forces.
Ed and Lorraine Warren,
who made sort of a career
out of claiming to be a
demonologist and a clairvoyant.
>>NOORY: Ed is no
longer with us.
>>NICKELL: Ed is
no longer with us.
They've taken
hapless families that
have had some trouble,
poltergeist or call it
what you will, and have managed
to convince people that this
was really something demonic.
And pretty soon, a book or
movie deal was in the offering.
And they did this from
Amityville, a haunting
in Connecticut.
There are just case
after case after case.
>>NOORY: There's another
one about a doll called
Annabel, right?
>>NICKELL: In many
of these cases,
the co-authors of the
books have now come forward
and said, well, Ed suggested
they kind of exaggerate
and make it scary.
But I've had the
good fortune recently
to have spent a week
driving to Rhode Island,
invited by the couple that
lives in that house now
and has done so for 30 years.
>>NOORY: And everything
is cool, right?
>>NICKELL: Nothing much.
>>NOORY: No issues.
>>NICKELL: Well,
like everybody else,
living in an old house they
occasionally hear a noise.
Maybe they weren't sure.
Pretty quickly they
figured out, we
don't have demons in the house.
What we have are some
noises, some odd things.
Norma Sutcliffe showed
me, for example--
and this is big in the book
that Andrea Perron wrote.
She wrote a trilogy of books,
the most voluminous bunch
of repetitious gobbledygook I've
known about in the paranormal.
It would have been
a much better work
if she had stuck to one
volume and slimmed it down.
But they claim
that, for example,
that if you slept at night,
the cellar door-- and they
make the cellar sound
like this sinister place.
It's just a scary
old dank cellar
from an 18th century home.
But they've said that the
door would mysteriously
open about the same
time every night.
>>NOORY: [IMITATES SQUEAKING]
>>NICKELL: Or
sometimes you walk by,
and it would open behind you.
Well, Norma and her
husband figured this out.
What was happening was the
door was slightly warped.
>>NOORY: It was
opening, though, right?
>>NICKELL: Well, it
would be latched.
It would be latched.
And then it would
open by itself.
So that was the big mystery.
>>NOORY: There's a ghost there!
>>NICKELL: What was happening
is the door was slightly warped.
And the catch would catch
enough to hold it in place,
but it wasn't fully engaged.
And of course at
night, the house
cools, things settle,
you hear noises.
Temperatures are
having an effect.
And the latch would
cool and pop open.
And sometimes if you walked
by it, what would happen
is you would step on a loose
floorboard right in front
of the door, and the
door would move a little,
and the latch would
pop open again.
So they just simply
had the door fixed.
And it doesn't do that anymore.
>>NOORY: It stopped.
Ah.
>>NICKELL: Norma took
me through the house,
and we looked at
things like that.
And what I found, and I
had done a lot of my work
from analyzing the
accounts, as I always do,
those stories-- and I know that
some things sincerely happened
to some of the family members,
but look what you had.
You had a sort of New
Agey mother and five girls
and a father who was largely
absent due to his work.
And the kids were all
looking to compete
for their mother's attention
or for father's attention.
They were trying to
outdo each other.
You had a little bit
of mischief, I think.
I would call it "poltergeists"
in quotation marks.
You had, as you often
have, somebody wakes up,
and they see some sinister
figure, having just woken.
>>NOORY: A shadow or something.
>>NICKELL: And they're
unable to move.
And this is a common phenomenon.
>>NOORY: That's sleep paralysis.
>>NICKELL: Yeah.
It's a waking dream
with sleep paralysis.
It's understood very, very well.
And you can go through the
book and just check off
the incidents in which that
is just described perfectly
and must have been
the explanation.
>>NOORY: It sounds to me,
Joe, that you do not believe
in ghosts based on this.
>>NICKELL: I'm not in
the belief business.
I'm in the
investigative business.
And I've not seen any
evidence that I believe--
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>NICKELL: --warrented-- right,
yet-- that warranted belief
in ghosts.
Ghosts are really not
a very scientific idea.
The idea that yes, we might have
some life energy that science
can't quite find, but the
idea that some form of energy
leaves the body at death and
doesn't dissipate and continues
after the source is gone
and continues for 100 years
is scientific nonsense.
It's like thinking that that
light bulb somehow when you
turn the light off goes
to another dimension.
No, it just turns into
heat energy and dissipates.
The idea that a
ghost without a brain
would be able to walk,
talk, and say boo
is not a scientific idea.
>>NOORY: Do you believe
in life after death?
>>NICKELL: I'm not in the
belief business, George.
>>NOORY: I'm gonna get you yet.
>>NICKELL: I don't believe--
>>NOORY: So what happens when
you die, in your opinion.
You don't know.
>>NICKELL: Everything stops.
I think it must stop.
>>NOORY: That's it.
Done.
>>NICKELL: Because we are
brain-centered beings.
I've dwelled on this a
lot in my own thinking.
I'm a serious poet.
I would love to imagine
other worlds and so forth.
But in fact, when our brain
is injured or not doing well,
things happen to it.
If the brain malfunctions,
then there are consequences.
My mother had Alzheimer's, and
I watched the effects of that.
To believe in ghosts
is almost to say, oh,
you don't really need a brain.
We don't need a brain.
You just have this spirit, and
it has a sort of spirit brain,
and the real brain
doesn't have-- no, that's
just nonsense.
>>NOORY: Joe, have
you investigated
anything-- anything--
that would lead
you to believe that maybe
there's some credence to some
of the supernatural stuff.
>>NICKELL: I have not.
>>NOORY: Nothing.
>>NICKELL: And that doesn't mean
that I can explain everything.
People always ask me,
is there anything you
haven't been able to explain?
Well, lots of things.
And then they say, see?
See?
As if they've got me.
No, because the
rest of that answer
is I haven't
examined things where
there is no evidence, where
people or their stories
long ago, far away, not
very investigatable.
I have no idea what
happened in those cases,
because we really don't
have any evidence.
>>NOORY: Would you like some
of these stories to be true?
>>NICKELL: Like everybody
else, like everyone,
I think we are
hopeful human beings.
We want to believe
in wonderful things.
If we were voting, we would
raise our hands right now.
Are ghosts real?
Sure, because we would
vote for that because we
want to live on after we die.
Almost everybody wants that.
Or we want to believe
that extraterrestrials
are real because we don't want
to be alone in the universe.
These are all wonderful ideas.
It's just that the
evidence is not there yet.
I suspect it's going to be a
long time coming and possibly
never.
>>NOORY: What about faith?
Where does faith fit in?
>>NICKELL: Faith?
>>NOORY: Yes.
Let me give you an
example, a miracle story.
A lady goes into her garage
and sees her son hanging
from a rope.
He attempted suicide.
She gets there with enough
time that he's still alive.
But what is she going to do?
The guy weighs 200 pounds.
She's 110.
She screams for help from God.
Out of nowhere,
she says, she sees
like an angel or
hands joining her,
lifting this 200-pound guy
up to release the stress
and the tension on the rope.
And as she screams,
a neighbor comes by
and helps and gets him down.
The guy lives.
How do you explain that?
>>NICKELL: First of all,
we skeptics have a saying.
Before we try to
explain something,
we have to make sure it really,
really happened as described.
I take you that you've seen
a case somewhat like that.
>>NOORY: We have
to assume it did.
>>NICKELL: But we can certainly
imagine a situation like that.
It's reasonably credible.
We're all able to summon
a great deal of strength
when we really need to.
>>NOORY: Adrenalin rush.
>>NICKELL: Yeah.
Absolutely.
>>NOORY: Like lifting a car
when it falls on somebody.
>>NICKELL: We're able
to empower ourselves
in ways that are really
impressive, and good that we
are.
But what happens
with miracle claims,
miracle claims
invariably are based
on what's called an
argument from ignorance.
The miracles are not
from positive evidence.
They're from negative evidence.
Every miracle claim-- look
at a bunch of them-- weeping
statues, faith healing,
are all based on, well,
we don't know how that
could have happened.
The doctors say they don't know
why Mrs. Smith's cancer went
into remission.
It must be a miracle of
the Holy Virgin Mary.
No.
When you say we don't know,
or doctors don't know,
that's where you stop.
You don't say, therefore,
it's a miracle.
And in fact, the medical
bureau at Lourdes,
the famous healing shrine,
said a few years ago
they were going to
quit playing that game.
Because they were
willing to say,
OK, some cases are remarkable.
>>NOORY: Something happened.
Right.
>>NICKELL: They would say that.
They're not going to
use the word "miracle."
Because what's
happening is the people
who are wanting to
sell you a miracle
are trying to trump science.
They're trying to
say, oh, yeah, sure.
Mrs. Smith may have had some
chemotherapy treatments,
but the doctors aren't
sure that was enough.
There had to be something more.
They're wanting to sell you
something more, a mystery,
and convince you that
there's a supernatural.
And there are
people who are going
to be in business to sell
you the supernatural.
So what we have to do is
look for evidence everywhere
in every area, in
every miracle case.
We have to look at it and
say, what do we really know,
and where's the evidence?
And I've just not seen-- I've
seen a lot of miracle hoaxes.
I've seen a lot of
wishful thinking.
But I have not seen
anything I thought
it was probably supernatural.
>>NOORY: Our friend
Erich von Daniken
wrote the book called
"Chariots of the Gods."
And he is convinced
that we have been
visited from
extraterrestrials from above.
One of the things that he uses
as his source to believe this
are the Nazca Lines in Peru,
where only from the air can
you figure out what the heck
you're looking at-- monkeys,
spiders, things like that.
You really can't make it out
when you're walking around
on good old planet Earth.
>>NICKELL: They are remarkable.
>>NOORY: What do
you think of that?
>>NICKELL: Those
figures are remarkable.
And what I resent about von
Daniken is that he, over
and over, whether it's the
building of the pyramids
or the stone statues on Easter
Island or what have you,
there's a kind of implied
racism in von Daniken's stuff,
that ancient, nonwhite
people couldn't
have done this because,
well, they're nonwhite.
I mean, it's there,
not expressly stated,
but it's implicit in
all of his writings,
that somehow they needed
higher beings to help them.
And I think it demeans
the great accomplishments
of the people who
built these things
and who created these things.
And I think the Nazca lines
are remarkable and were created
by the Nazca people who
flourished in the years
before and after Jesus
over a long period of time.
What I tried to do, my
little contribution to that,
was that people were
saying that there
was no way those ancient peoples
could have made a drawing so
large that you can only
see it from an airplane
and you can't see what
you're doing on the ground.
And I thought that was
a legitimate point.
Yes, OK, let's see
what could be done.
And people assured
me, oh, you would
have to have surveying equipment
or modern angle measurements.
>>NOORY: I don't think so.
>>NICKELL: Or you would have
to use something or other.
Some people thought maybe
they used a grid method.
Well, I had done a lot of work
as a kid as a sign painter
and had painted billboards
on the sides of buildings
with giant pictures, and I
knew it wasn't done with a grid
system, because a grid system
would minimize errors to
within a square.
You would not have, for
example, gross asymmetry,
mismatched wings, for example,
or that kind of thing.
So I was sure they
didn't do that.
I simply got a notion that
I could take a small drawing
and mock it up to a big
drawing using a center
line and some reference points.
I won't go into
great detail with it,
but basically plotting
some dots and connecting
them, a very simple, no
measuring of angles, nothing.
>>NOORY: They might have
done it with rope, too.
>>NICKELL: Well, they may have.
They certainly probably
scribed their circles with rope
and made spirals using that.
So I decided that if I
made one, I couldn't get by
with just making a small one.
Because I could hear the
people say, oh, yeah,
sure, Nickell made a little one.
Yeah, he could make the giant
condor, which is 440 feet long.
And I thought, OK, I'll
make the giant condor.
I got a landfill area and some
assorted cousins and nephews,
and we drove a post and
marked off the 440 feet
for the giant condor.
And I honestly gulped.
As confident as I was, and
I was sure I could do this,
to see on the ground
how absolutely huge
this was going to be--
>>NOORY: It is big.
>>NICKELL: --was intimidating.
But we just proceeded, and in a
couple of days, we had done it,
reproduced the giant condor.
>>NOORY: Did you look
at it from above?
>>NICKELL: We did later
fly over and film it.
>>NOORY: Did it look like one?
>>NICKELL: Scientific American
magazine said that my copy was,
quote-- I memorized
this because I was so
flattered-- "remarkable in its
exactness to the original."
In fact, we were so
accurate in our method
that in making a small drawing,
I had made one little error.
I had a line kind
of askew wrong.
And we copied that perfectly.
So you could see
that you can actually
pretty faithfully take
your small drawing
and make a big one.
I later decided that the
Nazcas probably didn't
plot as many points as I did.
And I thought I could do much
more freehand than I had done.
This is a little more daring.
>>NOORY: Well, but there
is no doubt they made it.
The question is, did they
make it for the gods?
>>NICKELL: Well, this
is the big question.
But I came out of retirement
to-- "National Geographic"
wanted me to make one for them.
And I said, but I've done
that, been there, done that.
And they said, yes,
but you didn't film it.
I said, well, you got me there.
>>NOORY: This time you did.
>>NICKELL: So I had to go
make one for them, made
the giant spider for them.
And they filmed it
from a cherry picker.
And it was great.
But what I've come
to-- at one point,
I noticed that the
Nazca drawings are all
done with a continuous line.
I'm not the first to
have noticed this.
But in other words,
on the Nazca pottery,
they would draw a body or a
wing, lift the brush or pen,
draw another feature, and it
was not done continuously.
But on the ground, it's a
whole different situation.
Once you start, you
make the entire figure
without lifting the
imaginary pencil.
And I thought when I first
started this, well, that's
just because they're plotting
points like I'm doing,
and they're just
connecting as they go,
which I think is a perfectly
reasonable hypothesis, just
completely reasonable.
I think it's wrong, but
it made perfect sense.
We now know-- and my friend Tony
Aveni from Colgate University
is a great Nazca expert.
He's done a lot of work on this.
And he calls these figures
labyrinths in the desert.
And what happens is
that each of the figures
has a couple of
extraneous lines,
like the monkey has
two lines going up
to the base of the
tail, or the spider
has two lines going off at a
right angle to the bottom leg.
And those lines serve
no layout purposes
or anatomical purposes, nothing,
except that if you combine
that with a
continuous line, what
you get is you walk
into one of those lines,
and on the ground--
I've been to Nazca--
they just look like footpaths.
They've been made
by clearing gravel
so that where the line
is, the gravel is removed,
and the rest has still got
the dark gravel on the ground.
So they look like footpaths.
If you walk in one of
the extraneous lines,
you will then continue to
walk the entire figure.
And a lot of them
have extra lines
and a lot of winding about.
But you will come back
out the other line.
>>NOORY: It is
remarkable architecture.
>>NICKELL: And I think
that these are probably,
and so does Aveni-- we think
they're ritual walking paths,
not necessarily meant to be
seen by the gods in the sky.
That may not have
been the main motive.
But they were certainly
processional, mystical
walking paths, perhaps
to gain the power
of that particular condor or
spider, sort of like a totem.
But we're guessing on that.
But if I'm sure
of very much, I'm
pretty sure that those
were ritual walking paths.
And I think they're
amazing, and I
think we don't need von Daniken
to take their wonderful work
away from them and attribute
it to extraterrestrials.
I'm offended by it.
>>NOORY: Final question--
is there a God?
>>NICKELL: We don't know.
I assume there is
not, because there
is nothing-- there is no
need to postulate a God.
Once you know that evolution
is a reality, you could say,
well, God created
man, but you have
to say, yeah, first what he did
was he created the dinosaurs.
And then He looked down and He
said, oh, my goodness, those
gigantic, lumbering beasts
with the little brains-- what
was I thinking?
I'll do better next--
I'll create man,
but I'm not going
to do it like that.
I'm going to have
him evolve slowly.
I mean, if that
makes sense to you,
by all means get out your Bible.
But it doesn't make sense to me.
And I don't think we need to
postulate a deity in order
to explain things.
I think there always
was something.
There never was nothing.
I think nothingness is
an utter impossibility.
There never was nothing and
then something came out of it.
I may be wrong.
Physicists are divided
over some of these issues.
>>NOORY: How did
it start, though?
I mean, I would agree with
you that there wasn't nothing.
>>NICKELL: It didn't start,
is what I'm thinking.
There always--
>>NOORY: We'll never
get the answer.
>>NICKELL: There
always was something.
And the Big Bang was
just one more event.
And before that was--
>>NOORY: Something blew
up that was already here.
>>NICKELL: Something
before that and before that
and before that.
>>NOORY: We'll never
get the answer, Joe.
>>NICKELL: Well, maybe
not, but we're certainly--
>>NOORY: I don't think so.
>>NICKELL: The more
we study our world,
the more-- for example, if we
had said what you just said,
we won't ever know, if we had
said that long before Darwin,
and people did, they
weren't on a track
to know as much as we know now.
But Darwin dared to
look for answers.
And we know so much more now.
We know that we evolved.
Back to Galileo, we know we're
not the center of the universe.
We are learning constantly.
>>NOORY: We know there are
other planets out there.
>>NICKELL: Exactly,
and other galaxies.
And it's wonderful.
But yes, we will
never, ever know
everything that's out there.
But we are learning much,
much more about ourselves
and our world, and
science is doing that.
And I hope to have played a
little, small role in that.
>>NOORY: Joe, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief,"
I appreciate it.
>>NICKELL: My pleasure.
>>NOORY: OK, so you just
heard it from a skeptic.
He doesn't believe in
ghosts-- not yet, anyway.
Not yet.
I'm George Noory.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]